{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww14680\viewh9580\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Text for Fire Pages: \
These are to be interspersed with sets of three images as I've already established on the FIRE INFO page.  The images will of course be different.  \
\
\
\
Fire Info: \
Some people get homesick for things rather than places--the smell of the ocean, the presence of their parents, the rush of adrenaline.  For me it's fire, from candles to jet-fuel explosions.  \
\
I am that guy who built  model houses in grade school so that he could fill them with fireworks and tissue paper and film them burning and exploding.  When I was 18, my friends and I filled a tin can with acetone and gasoline, strapped it to a raft made of firewood, set it afloat on the ocean and then shot potato cannons at it until it sank.  Finally, I liked the "behind the scenes" for Independence Day better than I liked the film itself, because it demonstrated how they created the visual effect of all those buildings descending into fiery ruin.  I watched documentaries about nitro-glycerin.  \
\
I might have gone on like this, setting small fires for the sake of art and eventually gone to prison for it or something, but I happened upon the most incredible thing, a fire art which was controlled, beautiful, non-destructive and which I could practice once a week or more.  Thus it was that within 24 hours of arriving at link\{Reed College\}, I had joined the fire troupe and begun to channel my obsession into an inspiration.  \
\
I am 23 years old now.  I am a member of two fire troupes, have achieved a high level of skill in several props, practice many more, combine these skills with partner acrobalance, teach fire safety to others, attend fire festivals, perform in Burning Man's conclave, and still play with fire at least once a week.  \
\
\
\
\
\
Booking: \
\
I used to joke that fire performance was the most marketable skill I learned in college.  While this hasn't held exactly true as the years progress, I do occasionally perform for money or trade.  I love performing and I'll often do it for free, or for the price of the local performance permit.  I am currently based in Portland OR, which is in the midst of link\{legal turmoil\} over permitting, so this is at times a bit complicated.  \
\
I am an especially safe fire performer, and have taught link\{fire safety\} at Reed College for several years.  I take this aspect of the sport, inescapably entwined with its longevity, very seriously.  \
\
Feel free to link\{contact me\} about fire safety, permitting, or booking via e-mail at any time.  \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
Legal:\
\
The Portland Fire Marshals are doing their part to participate in what seems to be a growing international trend to eliminate all sources of 
\i fun
\i0  from the world (you can no longer climb the Pyramids of Egypt or hitchhike safely) fire performance is all but outlawed in the rose city.  In order to perform indoors, the venue must have a stage area of [dimensions] and [these safety measures].  The official regulations are detailed link\{here\}.  \
\
What this means is that only a handful of venues can possibly offer indoor fire performance even if they want to, and none of these currently had the necessary permitting in place.  Every exotic dancer whose career was based on her use of fore arts is now out of work, and every fire performer who used to patronize events like Dante's Sinferno Cabaret is likewise bereft.  That about does it for indoor performance, so what about outdoors?\
\
Portland Parks and Recreation (PPR) has in place a legal policy of outlawing open flames in all their jurisdictions.  I have called them myself to ask whether this is a regulation which is non-negotiable or whether, if a suitable venue were found and operated exclusively by safety conscious persons a solution could be worked out.  The law is non-negotiable.  \
\
What this leaves is permitted performance on private property, or on other public property which is not controlled by the PPR, (such as the fire performances at the Last Thursday Street Fair).  To my knowledge the only two legal burns which take place in the city of Portland transpire on Reed's and Lewis & Cark's campuses, and even these are only open to the members of the organizations from those schools.  \
\
Two excellent commentaries have been published which elaborate on this situation in more detail.  These may be found in link\{this blog\} and in the blog of my friend link\{Kara Sowles\}.\
\
\
Safety: \
Maintaining safety is as essential to fire performance as the skill of the performer themself.  No trick requires a lapse in safety to perform, and therefore all tricks should be done properly and safely every time.  Accidents do, of course, happen, and for this reason proper safety measures must always be in place to avoid catastrophe.  \
\
Proper safety measures include everything from proper clothing, properly constructed props, and proper location to training in how to respond to the presence of fire and crisis management.  Every fire injury I have witnessed could have been avoided by proper training or procedures.\
\
Clothing					{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.homeofpoi.com/lessons_all/teach/Library-Fire-Training-Fire-training-and-safety-Clothing-and-Costume-Fire-safety-1_2_140"}}{\fldrslt http://www.homeofpoi.com/lessons_all/teach/Library-Fire-Training-Fire-training-and-safety-Clothing-and-Costume-Fire-safety-1_2_140}}\
Hair						\
Footwear					\
Props						\
Soaking					\
Spinning Off					\
safety (equippement)			{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.homeofpoi.com/lessons_all/teach/Library-How-to-make-your-own-gear-12_0_0"}}{\fldrslt http://www.homeofpoi.com/lessons_all/teach/Library-How-to-make-your-own-gear-12_0_0}}\
Safety (attitude)\
Performer (attitude)\
location\
fuels						{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fire_dancing#Fuels"}}{\fldrslt http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fire_dancing#Fuels}}\
Legal stuff about fuels:			{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.homeofpoi.com/lessons_all/teach/Know-your-fuel-MSDS-1_2_195"}}{\fldrslt http://www.homeofpoi.com/lessons_all/teach/Know-your-fuel-MSDS-1_2_195}}\
\
\
And there are link\{legal guidelines\} too of course, but in nearly every case my comments above are more stringent than they are.  The glaring exception is that no performer needs a 100ft by 80ft performance area to spin in in order to be safe.  This is an obnoxious and restrictive legal requirement, and is responsible for a massive link\{legal discussion\} in Portland OR at this moment.  \
\
For further resources, examining the safety pages of link\{Weapons of Mass Distraction\}, link\{Controlled Burn\}, link\{Home of Poi\} and others can be quite illuminating.  \
\
Home of Poi: {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.homeofpoi.com/lessons_all/teach/Library-Fire-Training-Fire-training-and-safety-1_2"}}{\fldrslt http://www.homeofpoi.com/lessons_all/teach/Library-Fire-Training-Fire-training-and-safety-1_2}}\
\
Controlled Burn: {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://controlledburnreno.com/?page_id=35"}}{\fldrslt http://controlledburnreno.com/?page_id=35}}\
}